README.md, before:

# System Email

This script is for emailing (Debian distro) Linux system information for passive
monitoring. The registered email address will receive a weekly email containing
basic system and storage information.

If there are any issues refer to the `system_email.log` inside `/opt/system_email`.

<!-- TOC -->

* [Script install](#script-install)
    * [Get the files](#get-the-files)
    * [Configure the script](#configure-the-script)
        * [Example .env file](#example-env-file)
    * [Create cron task](#create-cron-task)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Options](#options)
        * [-d, --dry-run](#-d---dry-run)
        * [-v, --version](#-v---version)
        * [-h, --help](#-h---help)
* [Email example](#email-example)
* [Future improvements](#future-improvements)

<!-- TOC -->

## Script install

### Get the files

Download the package into the system

```shell
wget <the url for the system_email.tar.gz in git>
```

Unpack the files into `/opt/`.

```shell
sudo tar -xf system_email.tar.gz -C /opt/
```

Check that the script works by printing its version.

```shell
./opt/system_email/system_email --version
```

### Configure the script

Generate the config file.
*This will end in an error telling you to fill out the `.env` file*

```shell
./opt/system_email/system_email
```

Edit the file to be able to send emails.

```shell
sudo nano /opt/system_email/.env
```

#### Example .env file

The file will look like the following when done *but with your values*.

```text
EMAIL_FROM_ADDRESS=myaddress@provider.com
EMAIL_PASSWORD=dbabdszdkxvpfkdc
EMAIL_TO_ADDRESS=youraddress@provider.com
```

### Create cron task

Create a file `system_email` (with no extension) in `/etc/cron.weekly`.

```shell
sudo nano /etc/cron.weekly/system_email
```

Fill it with the lines below. This will run the script and log any print
statements or errors to the log `system_email.log` in the installation dir
`/opt/system_email`.
*Include a blank line at the end of the file.*

```shell
#!/bin/bash

/opt/system_email/system_email > /opt/system_email/system_email.log

```

Make it executable.

```shell
sudo chmod +x /etc/cron.weekly/system_email
```

## Usage

```shell
system_email [options]
```

### Options

#### -d, --dry-run

Run the script without sending an email.

#### -v, --version

Show the version and exit.

#### -h, --help

Show the help message and exit.

## Email example

<body>
<h3>Main Server's update</h3>
<p>Wed Oct 19 23:17:02 2022</p>

<h3>System status</h3>
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Hostname</th>
        <td>mainserver</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Uptime</th>
        <td>6 hours, 8 minutes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Pending updates</th>
        <td>0</td>
    </tr>
</table>


<h3>Drive partition status</h3>
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Filesystem</th>
        <td>/dev/sda1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Size</th>
        <td>457G</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Used</th>
        <td>70G</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Available</th>
        <td>364G</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Use%</th>
        <td>17%</td>
    </tr>
</table>


<h3>ZPool status</h3>
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Size</th>
        <td>18.1T</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Free space</th>
        <td>3.36T</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Fragmentation</th>
        <td>12%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Capacity</th>
        <td>81%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Health</th>
        <td>ONLINE</td>
    </tr>
</table>
</body>

<hr/>

## Future improvements

1. Installer script
    - add script to `/etc/cron.weekly`
    - generate `.env` with user supplied values
2. Uninstall script
3. Update script - load the new version and keep the `.env` file
4. Convert `README.md` to `README.txt` for build bundle
5. Add S.M.A.R.T. drive info table
6. Make tables dynamic based on if data exists (hide tables that do not contain data)
7. Be able to display more than 1 drive in "Drive partition status"
8. Make a dashboard section for quick information (&check; or &cross; for features)

Commit message:

add the installer option to README.md

README.md, after:

# System Email

This script is for emailing (Debian distro) Linux system information for passive
monitoring. The registered email address will receive a weekly email containing
basic system and storage information.

If there are any issues refer to the `system_email.log` inside `/opt/system_email`.

<!-- TOC -->

* [Script install](#script-install)
    * [Get the files](#get-the-files)
    * [Configure the script](#configure-the-script)
        * [Example .env file](#example-env-file)
    * [Create cron task](#create-cron-task)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Options](#options)
        * [-d, --dry-run](#-d---dry-run)
        * [-i, --install](#-i---install)
        * [-v, --version](#-v---version)
        * [-h, --help](#-h---help)
* [Email example](#email-example)
* [Future improvements](#future-improvements)

<!-- TOC -->

## Script install

### Get the files

Download the package into the system

```shell
wget <the url for the system_email.tar.gz in git>
```

Unpack the files into `/opt/`.

```shell
sudo tar -xf system_email.tar.gz -C /opt/
```

Check that the script works by printing its version.

```shell
./opt/system_email/system_email --version
```

### Configure the script

Generate the config file.
*This will end in an error telling you to fill out the `.env` file*

```shell
./opt/system_email/system_email
```

Edit the file to be able to send emails.

```shell
sudo nano /opt/system_email/.env
```

#### Example .env file

The file will look like the following when done *but with your values*.

```text
EMAIL_FROM_ADDRESS=myaddress@provider.com
EMAIL_PASSWORD=dbabdszdkxvpfkdc
EMAIL_TO_ADDRESS=youraddress@provider.com
```

### Create cron task

Run the script using the [`--install`](#-i---install) argument to generate the cron
script in `/etc/cron.weekly/`.

```shell
sudo ./opt/system_email/system_email --install
```

## Usage

```shell
system_email [options]
```

### Options

#### -d, --dry-run

Run the script without sending an email.

*This option can also be used with [`--install`](#-i---install) to try out the
installation without modifying the system*

#### -i, --install

Install/Update the script into the system.

> #### Important
> To modify files in the `/etc/` dir, this option requires elevated privileges.

#### -v, --version

Show the version and exit.

#### -h, --help

Show the help message and exit.

## Email example

<body>
<h3>Main Server's update</h3>
<p>Wed Oct 19 23:17:02 2022</p>

<h3>System status</h3>
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Hostname</th>
        <td>mainserver</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Uptime</th>
        <td>6 hours, 8 minutes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Pending updates</th>
        <td>0</td>
    </tr>
</table>


<h3>Drive partition status</h3>
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Filesystem</th>
        <td>/dev/sda1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Size</th>
        <td>457G</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Used</th>
        <td>70G</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Available</th>
        <td>364G</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Use%</th>
        <td>17%</td>
    </tr>
</table>


<h3>ZPool status</h3>
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Size</th>
        <td>18.1T</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Free space</th>
        <td>3.36T</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Fragmentation</th>
        <td>12%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Capacity</th>
        <td>81%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Health</th>
        <td>ONLINE</td>
    </tr>
</table>
</body>

<hr/>

## Future improvements

1. Installer script
    - generate `.env` with user supplied values
2. Uninstall script
3. Update script - load the new version and keep the `.env` file
4. Convert `README.md` to `README.txt` for build bundle
5. Add S.M.A.R.T. drive info table
6. Make tables dynamic based on if data exists (hide tables that do not contain data)
7. Be able to display more than 1 drive in "Drive partition status"
8. Make a dashboard section for quick information (&check; or &cross; for features)
